---
layout: post
title: Notes on public speaking
---

{{ page.title }}
================
I've been to a lot of talks recently, and I've noticed a pretty big difference between how speakers give presentations in the humanities and in HCI. (You can see all of my notes from the two DH series at MIT this spring [here](https://crystaljjlee.blogspot.com/2019/04/digital-humanities-talks-at-mit-spring.html) and my notes from the conference called "Touch This Page!" at Harvard [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1LLhVbwHjYjDiCzcdI299wZ7L8TVY71Dlw0Z9Drvzbzk/edit?usp=sharing). A post with all the notes from the HCI talks this semester is forthcoming.) For all the humanist babble about being good communicators and teaching students to speak articulately, I've found that, on average, the talks in HCI are a _great deal_ clearer and more engaging. I wonder if part of it is a matter of convener: [Arvind Satyanarayan](https://arvindsatya.com/) has been the host of all of the HCI talks I've been to, and as an incredible speaker himself, I think he really values that in other researchers, too. (See him in action [here](https://youtu.be/IalopOvr8o4?t=91).) What I find especially compelling about Arvind and the speakers he hosts is not just that they're incredibly articulate and use slides in a very compelling, interactive manner, but that they do so while speaking extemporaneously. The slides punctuate and often interactively illustrate the points they're making – in fact, it can be kind of hard to imagine how they would make their points without them (and vice versa). And despite speaking without notes, I've found that the speakers speak relatively tersely: they choose their words carefully, and since the slides are tightly choreographed to specific points they're going to make, the speakers very rarely go off on big tangents. The other thing that I've noticed is that the talks have a clear roadmap and break down each point they're going to make into smaller, bite-sized chunks that then lead back to the bigger picture.  
  
So, this all sounds like a generally good set of practices when giving any talk, and indeed, they're all things I've heard myself (and many of my colleagues!) say to students whenever we're about to start having oral presentations in a class. At the same time, though, I'm often stricken by how tightly historians and anthropologists often cling to prepared remarks which are often read verbatim despite our exhortations to do the _exact opposite_. (I am one of these people, alas.)  
  
Anyways, this isn't to say that all humanists are bad speakers (shoutout to [Mara Mills](https://steinhardt.nyu.edu/faculty/Mara_Mills), a speaker at Touch This Page! whose talk really got me thinking about new work in disability studies, but also made me rethink how to give presentations in the future). I've gotten a lot of good advice from people in all sorts of disciplines about how to give a good talk, and frankly, it's always harder to _execute_ the advice than it is to write all of it down, especially since there are entire books on the subject.  
  
Given all that, though, here are some of the things I've noticed really effective speakers do:  
  

-   **Repeat the question that they're being asked right before they're about to answer it.** I think this is generally pretty helpful, especially since it buys you some time to think about what the question is actually about before you give the answer. But as a larger accessibility point, if you're in a big room with a mic (or if the talk is being recorded), it gives the audience an opportunity to know what you're responding to. 

  

-   **Verbally describe each image shows and relate it to what you're talking about.** This forces you to actually think about _why_ you're showing the image, and how it actually advances the argument you're making. No use in having an image just for show – analyze it! Tell us why it's important! (This was a point that Mara Mills made sure to point out: since Touch This Page! was a conference about blindness and archives, it made sense to describe each of the images in case someone isn't able to actually see the image, whether it's because they're in the back of the room or because they have visual impairments.) 

  

-   **You can probably cover 2-3 concepts in the talk, and you should break down each concept into 4-5 chunks.** Obviously, these guidelines are relatively loose since the format of each talk is going to be somewhat different – the DH/architecture/HCI talks I've been to tend to present 2-3 projects, which serves as a pretty easy way to demarcate "concepts," whereas history/anthro talks tend to chart a bigger thematic story. Even then, I feel like it's possible to break down that bigger story into a couple of discrete concepts, which can then be decomposed further, which will prevent you from going off on tangents about that random story you love from that archival collection. 

-   **Don't rely on an outline format on each slide.** I'm fairly certain that 100% of the HCI speakers I saw used Keynote (Mac only, I'm afraid) – and to great effect. None of them had the straightforward outline that you usually see in presentation programs; they created visual cues that structured how they thought about relationships between different ideas. You can learn how to use Keynote/PowerPoint pretty effectively with [a couple tutorials](https://vimeo.com/langeli) from the inimitable [Lan Li](http://lan-a-li.com/about) (a humanist who gives _gorgeous_ talks). 
  
\[1\] I'm willing to admit that I am totally, completely one of these people. I can say that I'm just adhering to "disciplinary norms" or whatever, but really I'm nervous and want to make sure that I'm using my words carefully when I'm talking to an audience who might aggressively interrogate me for using "social history" in a particular (i.e. wrong) way, which is a real thing that has happened to me before.